# Assignment 2 Write-Up
## CS1501 Professor Khattab
### Rand Hasan

To solve the autocomplete problem, I spent a lot of time trying to implement the add(String word) method correctly.  I first checked if the word argument was an empty String in this method.  In this case, I'd throw an IllegalArgumentException.  From there, I set the currentNode pointer to the root.  This is where things got a bit tricky.  I wrote a for-loop that iterated through each character in the word argument.  If the root node was null (meaning this was the first letter and first word we were adding to the DLB trie), I made a new root node for that first letter.  Otherwise, if the word's first letter did not match the letter of the root, I added a sibling to the root node and made the currentNode point to it.  Figuring this out was probably what I struggled with the most when writing the program.  Before, I made the first letter of the first word being added to the dictionary the root node and then proceeded to make all words branch off from this one letter whether or not it was even in the word.  Eventually, I realized I should make siblings for the root node to eliminate this extra node.  The rest of the algorithm after this fix was fairly simple.  I would move the currentNode pointer to its child.  If it was null, I would proceed to make it a new DLBNode that stored the next letter in the word.  Otherwise, I would proceed to iterate through the currentNode’s next siblings until either finding a node that already stored the next letter or creating a new one.  I repeated this process for all of the letters in the word.

Another issue I dealt with was that getNumberOfPredictions() sometimes returned an incorrect number of predictions.  The method itself just returned the size of the currentNode which was updated correctly in add(String word) so the issue was very likely an issue with the advance() method regarding what currentNode was pointing to.  To attempt to fix this problem, I made a local variable in the add(String word) method to create the DLB Trie because I initially did so using currentNode.  I think this caused other problems I dealt with throughout writing the code so I made sure to limit my use of the currentNode variable to keep track of it’s value.  Unfortunately, my solution still wasn’t perfect with that problem of the number of predictions, but everything else is fine.  If I were to speculate on how this could be done, I think I’d rewrite advance() to move from wherever currentNode is pointing rather than iterating through the entire DLB.  I did attempt to do this but lost the functionality I had before with the method so that's why I decided to just stick with what I had.

# Asymptotic analysis of the worst-case running time of the public methods of AutoCompleteInterface:

**public boolean add(String word)** -> O(alphabet size*word.length())
I was able to meet the running time as I traversed through the DLB Trie.  The worst-case would occur as we traverse through the DLB Trie for each letter in the word in the case that we have to go through all of the siblings (can be the entire alphabet) to find the next node to proceed to.

**public boolean advance(char c)** -> O(alphabet size)
The worst case was O(alphabet size) in which the character we want to advance to is not the child of the currentNode but rather the sibling of the child.  We could have an entire alphabet's worth of siblings for this child node and thus that explains the expected running time.  HOWEVER, for my code, the running time of this method was O(alphabet size*word.length()) because I always set currentNode = root node and proceeded to traverse through the Trie from there.  If I were to rewrite the advance() method I would not do this but rather just move from the last instance of currentNode which shouldn't really change outside of this method and retreat().

**public void retreat()** -> O(alphabet size)
I actually wrote this in O(1) time because I made a global variable called backtrack that stores the node the currentNode was pointing at prior to equaling null.  This enabled it to go back quickly without having to potentially iterate through an alphabet length's worth of previousSiblings which would result in the expected worst case runtime.

**public void reset()**  -> O(1)
This is always O(1) because I just assigned the global variables to the inital values.

**public boolean isWord()**  -> O(1)
This is always O(1) because I just return whether or not the isWord variable of the currentNode is true or false assuming the currentNode is not null.

**public void add()** -> O(alphabet size*length of the current prefix)
This is O(alphabet size*length of the current prefix) because it just calls the other add method which builds the Trie.

**public void getNumberOfPredictions()** -> O(1)
This is always O(1) because I just returned the size variable of the currentNode assuming it is not null.

**public void retrievePrediction()** -> O(prediction.length())
This was O(prediction.length()) in the worst case in which the children of the currentNode are iterated through until one of them is flagged (isWord) therefore making the word the prediction.  If none of them are flagged, we won't realize that anyways until iterating through all of the children and appending them to the prediction. 
