# Assignment 1 Write-Up
## CS1501 Professor Khattab
### Rand Hasan

To solve the crossword-filling puzzle, I relied heavily on the recorded lesson for ideas.  My logic was more or less the same as that which was explained.  In my fillPuzzle() method, I initialized a few instance variables and proceeded to call my recursive placeChar() method that really acted as the brains of the operations.  

This method started at the first cell in the board (0,0) and move from left to right across a row (recursively) before proceeding to the first column of the following row.  This pattern continues until the very last cell is reached.  At each index, the method checked what was already in the board.  If it was a '+', all 26 letters of the alphabet were tested with an additional call to a helper method, isValid().  The isValiid() method ran many cases based on the position of the current cell and whether or not whatever was in that cell (either a potential or preset letter) would enable the current row or col that the cell was in to be a possible word.  If not, the method would return false and a different letter would be attempted.  The placeChar() method also checked if the cell contained a '-'.  In this case, the '-' would be appended to the current cell's row and char StringBuilder variables which would later be useful for the isValid() method that would search the dictionary for the row and col prefixes starting at the last index of this '-' + 1.  Of course if there was no minus sign, the prefixes would begin at the start (0) of their prospective rows and cols.  Finally, placeChar() checked if the board had a preset letter. In this case, the letter would remain, but the isValid() method would still be called to determine whether the letters before or above the preset letter would still potentially create a word.  If not, we would back track.  

The main errors I ran with initally began with this isValid() method.  The logic behind every possible scenario in which a row or col prefix would be invalid took some time to figure out, but I do believe the isValid() method is pretty functional.  Another BIG issue I dealt with that I still haven't entirely figured out is the '-' case in the placeChar() method.  For whatever reason, there appears to be some disconnect between what to do in the event of a '-' between that method and isValid().  To correct this, I'm not entirely sure what can be done otherwise I would've hopefully implemented it.  I do believe it has something to do with backtracking though when reaching a '-' although I thought isValid(0 was sufficient enough.

To write checkPuzzle() I went through each row and column to verify that the contents created a word.  In the event that there was a '-', the words would be split accordingly and verified separately.  I also checked if there were any major differences in the emptyBoard and filledBoard like a lack of a '-' or preset letter.

Overall, I think using instance StringBuilder variables for each row and col as I tried building up words was really helpful.  Being able to append and also go back in case of a lack in validity was really helpful.   

For runtimes, I have recorded below some approximate times for the different text files:

**test3a.txt:** ~ 1 second

**test3b.txt:** ~ 6 seconds

**test4a.txt:** ~ 19 seconds

**test4b.txt:** ~ 14 seconds

**test4c.txt:** ~ 1.3 seconds

**test4d.txt:** ~ 1 second (note that this was invalid)

**test4e.txt:** > 2 mins (did not wait for board to print)

**test4f.txt:** ~ 1 second (note that this was invalid)

**test5a.txt:** ~ 16 seconds

**test6a.txt:** > 2 minutes


Those were the only ones I recorded because after that the runtimes kept increases.  I'd assume that boards of size 7 and 8 would take upwards of several hours.  Some observations are that when the board size got larger (ex. 3 to 5), the runtime took longer.  This wasn't very surprising as with bigger board sizes, the programs goes through more cells and runs tests to determine which characters to place in them.  There did seem to be some discrepencies with the runtimes as the pattern wasn't super obvious but I assume that has to do with the program's overall functionality.  Something else I picked up is that boards with either preset letters or '-' have a much larger runtime due to backtracking to accomodate for these "set-in-stone" characters.  I did find this a little usual as I thought that a preset letter in specific might speed things up but I guess backtracking would slow things down a bit.

After some thinking, I believe the program I've written out has a worst-case runtime of O(N!) where N is the board's width/height.  This assumption is based on the fact that placeChar() uses recursive and can make up to 26 recursive calls for a single cell if it has a '+' in it's position.  This brings us to 26^N which is ultimately O(N!).  Naturally this isn't very good but it is the worst case.  Keep in mind the isValid() function doesn't have constant time complexity so the program overall with not always be O(N!).  The isValid() method is most likely slow I'm assuming as it performs many checks and searches but I couldn't come up with any other functional solutions that did the job at the very least.  

Overall, I am slightly bummed I didn't crack the code but I do think I put an appropriate amount of effort in and tried as hard as I could.  I feel more prepared for future assignments knowing the process now and have high hopes for the future.
